Application architecture
flowchart TD
  browser[Web browser] -->|"HTTPS requests"| loadbalancer(Load balancer / proxy)
  A1[Native client] -->|"HTTPS requests"| loadbalancer
  A2[SVN or Git client] -->|"HTTPS requests"| loadbalancer
  loadbalancer -->|Proxy| openproject
  
  subgraph openproject[OpenProject Core Application]
    openprojectrailsapp[Rails application]
    C[Puma app server]
    D[Background worker]
  end


  subgraph integrations[External Integrations]
  direction TB
    idp["Identity provider (idp)"]
    nex["Nextcloud (nex)"]
    gih["GitHub (gih)"]
    gil["GitLab (gil)"]
    cal["Calendar (cal)"]
    O["API integrations (api)"]
    W["Outgoing webhooks"]
  end

  subgraph services[Internal Services]
  direction TB
    M[Memcached]
    P[PostgreSQL]
    S[Object storage or NFS]
    email["Email gateways (eml)"]
  end

  openproject <-->|"TCP requests"| services
  openproject -->|"HTTPS requests"| integrations
  loadbalancer <-->|"HTTPS requsts"| integrations
  
  subgraph localclients[Local Client / User device]
  direction TB
  browser
  A1
  A2
  end
Involved services
Service
Relationship to OpenProject
Communication interfaces and mechanisms
Access modes
(R - read)
(W - write)
References
Web browser
Performs requests to the application
HTTPS
RW
n/a
Native client
Performs requests to the application
HTTPS
RW
n/a
SVN client
Performs SVN requests to the application web server
HTTPS
RW
Repository integrations
Git client
Performs Git Smart HTTP requests to the application server
HTTPS
RW
Repository integrations
Load balancer / Proxy
Depending on installation mechanism, terminates TLS/SSL, accepts and proxies or load balances web requests to the different OpenProject web application servers
HTTPS / PROXY
-
Configuration for packaged installations
Configuration for Docker/Kubernetes
Puma application server
Accepts web requests, runs the OpenProject web facing application
Web requests (HTTP/HTTPS)
Database (TCP)
Memcached (TCP)
Email gateways (SMTP)
External integration requests (HTTPS)
RW
Database TLS setup
Cache configuration
SMTP configuration
Integrations guide
Memcached / Redis / File cache
Application-level cache (if enabled)
TCP connections
RW
Cache configuration
PostgreSQL
Database management system
(Encrypted) TCP connections between web and background workers
Database TLS setup
Background worker
Handles asynchronous jobs, such as backup requests, email delivery,
Database (TCP)
Memcached (TCP)
Email gateways (SMTP)
External integration requests (HTTPS)
RW
Database TLS setup
Cache configuration
SMTP configuration
Integrations guide
Attached storages or Object storage
Access for attachments for the OpenProject application.
Either directly (or networked) attached storages, or configuration of an S3-compatible Object store
Local filesystem access (local drives, NFS)
HTTPS (S3-compatible storage)
RW
Configuration of the attachment storage
Email gateways
Send emails (e.g., notifications) from OpenProject application
SMTP
W (deliver mails to relay)
SMTP configuration
Identity providers
External authentication providers (e.g., Keycloak, ADFS, etc.)
HTTPS through standard protocols (OpenID connect, SAML, OAuth 2.0)
R (Redirect and read user info)
OpenID connect provider configuration
SAML provider configuration
OAuth 2.0 application configuration
Nextcloud
External bilateral integration
HTTPS
RW
Nextcloud integration guide
GitHub
Pull Request / Issue referencing Integration into OpenProject
HTTPS (Webhooks)
R (Incoming webhook from GitHub)
GitHub integration guide
GitLab
Merge Request / Issue referencing Integration into OpenProject
HTTPS (Webhooks)
R (Incoming webhook from GitLab)
GitLab integration guide
Calendars
External calendars requesting dynamic ICS calendar files from OpenProject
HTTPS (iCalendar/webdav)
R (Outgoing calendar data)
Calendar subscriptions configuration
API integrations
Structural access to OpenProject through API endpoints. Optional access to users and third party organizations depending on authorized scopes
HTTPS
(Optional) R
(Optional) W
API configuration
Outgoing Webhooks
Outgoing requests for changes within the application
HTTPS
R (Outgoing webhook data)
Webhook configuration an administration
Software
OpenProject is developed as a GPLv3 licensed, open-source software. The software core is developed and maintained using
GitHub
. OpenProject is available as several versions:
Community Edition
Enterprise on-premises and Enterprise cloud
Environments
OpenProject is continuously tested, developed, and distributed using the following environments
Environment
Description
Release Target
Deployment cycles
Edge
Automatic deployments through
GitHub actions
for instances on openproject-edge.com
Subject for continuous QA, acceptance and regression testing.
Next minor or major release planned and developed in our
community instance
On every push to
opf/openproject#dev
Stage
Automatic deployments through
GitHub actions
for instances on openproject-stage.com.
Subject for QA and acceptance testing of bugfix prior to stable releases.
Next patch release of the current stable release following our
release plan
On every push to
release/X.Y
, where
X.Y
is the current stable release major and minor versions.
Production
(SaaS / Cloud)
Production cloud environments. Deployed manually with the latest stable release
Stable releases
Manually
Production
(Docker images)
Official public OpenProject docker images
Continuous delivery for development versions using
dev-*
tags.
Stable releases through major, minor, or patch level tags.
Development (
dev
,
dev-slim
tag)
Stable releases (
X
,
X.Y
,
X.Y.Z
,
X-slim
,
X.Y-slim
,
X.Y.Z-slim
)
Automatically on new releases of the OpenProject application
Production
(Packages)
Official public OpenProject Linux packages
Stable releases for supported distributions
Stable releases
Automatically on new releases of the OpenProject application
Production
(Helm chart)
Official public OpenProject Helm charts
Stable releases
Stable releases (configurable through container tags)
Updates to Helm chart are manual, underlying deployment uses OpenProject docker images
PullPreview
Temporary instances for development of features scope to a pull request.
Feature branches
Automatically deployed when developers/QA request a pull preview instance by labelling pull requests with the
PullPreview
tag.
Patch and change management
OpenProject uses the Community instance
https://community.openproject.org
for managing the application lifecycle. For a full overview on the process of developing changes to the application, please see our
product development guide
.
This section summarizes all relevant information about the process for providing releases.
Current release
The
release notes
provide a list of all the releases including the current stable one.
Administrators can identify their currently deployed version of OpenProject in the
Administration information page of their installation
.
Upcoming releases
See the
Roadmap
for the overview of the upcoming stable releases.
Versioning
OpenProject follows
Semantic Versioning
. Therefore, the version is a composition of three digits in the format of e.g. 0.1.1 and can be summarized as followed:
MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes,
MINOR version when you add functionality in a backwards-compatible manner, and
PATCH version when you make backwards-compatible bug fixes.
Please note that OpenProject considers the following to be non breaking changes which do not lead to a new major version:
Database schema changes
Updates on depended upon libraries packaged with the distributions of OpenProject (e.g. Ruby, Rails, etc.)
Changes to those can thus happen also in minor or patch releases.
On the other hand, changes to the following are considered breaking changes and thus lead to a new major version.
Changes to the minimum version of supported operating systems.
Changes to the minimum version of the supported database system (PostgreSQL).
This list is not conclusive but rather serves to highlight the difference to the previous list of non breaking changes.
Version tracing in containers and packages
OpenProject embeds some release information into the packages and containers to ensure they are traceable. For all containers, the following files exist under
/app
. For packages, these files reside under
/opt/openproject/
and
/opt/openproject/config
, depending on the used version.
CORE_VERSION
: Reference to the commit of the
https://github.com/opf/openproject
core repository of OpenProject that is the foundation of the build
CORE_URL
URL to the commit at GitHub for easier reference
PRODUCT_VERSION
Commit of the flavour/product version. In case of the
openDesk container
, contains a reference to the openDesk repository
https://github.com/opf/openproject-open_desk
BUILDER_VERSION
Internal reference of the building CI repository that we use to create and publish the images.
Support of releases
For the community edition, only the current stable release is maintained. The
Enterprise on-premises
provides extended maintenance.
We recommended to update to a new stable release as soon as possible to have a supported version installed. To that end, OpenProject will show an information banner to administrators in case a new stable release is available.
Change history
All changes made to the OpenProject software are documented via work packages bundled by the version. The
Roadmap view
gives a corresponding overview. A release is also summarized in the
release notes
.
Distribution
OpenProject is distributed in
various formats
. Manual installation based on the code in GitHub is possible but not supported.
Versions in the codebase
The version is represented as
tags
and
branches
in the repository. The version is also manifested in the
version.rb
.
Components
A typical installation of OpenProject uses a web server such as NGINX or Apache to proxy requests to and from the internal
Puma
application server. All web requests are handled internally by it. A background job queue is used to execute longer running data requests or asynchronous communications.
Puma application server
OpenProject uses a Puma application server to run and handle requests for the Rails stack. All HTTP(S) requests to OpenProject are handled by it. Puma is a configurable multi-process, multithreading server. The exact number of servers being operated depends on your deployment method of OpenProject. See the
process control and scaling documentation
for more information.
External load balancer or proxying server
A web server is expected to handle requests between the end-user and the internal Puma application server. It is responsible for e.g., terminating TLS and managing user-facing HTTP connections, but depending on the deployment, also for serving static assets and certain caching related functionality. This server performs a proxy-reverse proxy pattern with the internal application server. No external connections are allowed directly to the Puma server.
Rails application
The core application, built on the Ruby on Rails framework, handling business logic, database operations, and user interactions. Utilizes the Model-View-Controller (MVC) design pattern. Follows
secure coding guidelines
for authentication, session management, user input validation, and error logging.
The application aims to return to the MVC pattern using Rails, Hotwire, and ViewComponents for UI element composition. This strategy aims for higher usability and efficient development.
Angular frontend
Some of the responses of the application include a frontend application approach using Angular. These pages communicate with a REST API to receive data and perform updates. An example of this is the work packages module. Requests within the module are handled completely in the frontend, while boundary requests are forwarded to the Rails stack, returning to a classical request/response pattern.
All requests to the application are still handled by Rails. In some of the responses, only the root Angular component is rendered to bootstrap the Angular frontend. On these pages,
UI-Router for Angular
parses the URL to determine what module/frontend route to load and show.
In the following, we’ll take a look at the different components at use in the application stack of OpenProject as well as concrete examples on how these components interact.
Exemplary frontend view request
Let’s take a look at how the request to
/projects/identifier/work_packages
would be handled by Rails and Angular (excluding any external actual HTTP requests to the web server)
Rails receives the request and according to its
config/routes.rb
, will handle the request with the
WorkPackagesController#index action
.
This controller responds with
an index template
that only renders some details but otherwise, will output the
<openproject-base>
Angular root component that is defined in the
Rails angular layout
.
The rendered response is returned to the Browser and Angular is initialized globally once in
frontend/src/main.ts
.
As the
<openproject-base>
component contains a ui-router
[ui-ref]
directive, the ui-router will start parsing the URL and looks for a route definition that matches. It will end up matching
root.work-packages
defined in the work packages’ module routes file
.
From there, the flow is as with a single-page application. The router mounts that component and the Angular frontend will use the APIv3 to fetch and render the application table.
This will result in a page on which the majority of the content has been rendered by Angular. Only the toolbar, basic page structure, and upper side menu have been rendered by Rails.
This approach has the significant disadvantage to go through the entire Rails stack first to output a response that is mostly irrelevant for the Angular application, and both systems (Rails and Angular) need a somewhat duplicated routing information. The long-term goal is to move to a single-page application and avoid the first two steps.
Exemplary Rails view request augmented by Angular
A response that is fully controlled by Rails but extended by some Angular components in the frontend might look as follows. Let’s take a look at the request to
edit a type’s form configuration
/types/1/edit/form_configuration
:
Rails receives the request and according to its
config/routes.rb
, will handle the request with the
TypesController#edit action
with its tab set to
form_configuration
.
This controller responds with
an edit template
that will include the
type form partial
. In this component, an Angular component is explicitly output that will be bootstrapped on page load.
The rendered response is returned to the Browser and Angular is initialized globally once in
frontend/src/main.ts
.
Dynamic components in Angular are registered as
custom elements
so they can be used throughout the page as web components.
This triggers the
FormConfigurationComponent
to be initialized and allows the application to include a highly dynamic component (drag & drop organization of attributes) to be used on an admin form that otherwise has no connection to Angular.
Evolution of the application
Historically, OpenProject has been forked from
Redmine
and modified from a primarily software-development focused flow into a general project management application suite. A Ruby on Rails monolith was used to serve the entire application, frontend and API. Javascript was used to extend some of the functionality with Prototype.js and jQuery on existing, Rails-rendered pages.
The monolith was turned into a hybrid application with semi-separated JavaScript frontend by the
introduction of AngularJS in 2014
for a redesign of the
work package table
. The Rails monolith was and is still rendering a large portion of the frontend however. The AngularJS frontend was served from within Rails and not separated. Therefore, the application frontend is not a single-page application yet.
Due to performance issues with AngularJS digest cycles and a large number of components, the work package table was
refactored into a plain JavaScript renderer
end of 2016. Finally, in early 2018, the application frontend was
migrated from AngularJS to Angular
during the course of a few releases.
In early 2019
, the rest of AngularJS code was removed and the frontend switched to the Angular CLI with Ahead-of-Time compilation (AOT).