Multi-language page names (URLs) and multi-language text fields make developing a multilingual site as easy as developing a single language site.
ProcessWire's multi-language support includes a full gettext-style
translation system
, but with the translation tools built into the CMS, and without actually using gettext. You can also install (or create) alternate language packs for the admin side of ProcessWire.
Multi-language support is installed with core modules available in the admin: Modules > Language > Language Support. If you just want to install alternate language packs, then all you need is the base
Language Support
module. If you want to support multi-language fields in your own site, then you should also install the
Language Support Fields
module. We also recommend installing
Language Support Page Names
module for multi-language URLs
.
Code i18n
This page provides detailed documentation on everything you need to know to make your template files or modules translatable using ProcessWire's translation tools.
Multi-language fields
Here we look in detail at multi-language fields and language-alternate fields, as well as how to use them. Also includes a video overview and examples of how to use language fields to create full multi-language websites.
Multi-language URLs
Multi-language URLs and page names enable you to maintain different/translated URLs for each page, based on the language. It also lets you produce your site easily, as the language is determined automatically by the URL.
Language Packs
Language packs for use with the ProcessWire admin.
Multi-Language Support Forum
A place to get support and chat about multi-language capabilities in ProcessWire.
Hreflang tag generator
Hreflang tag generator for multi-language websites. Select a language and optionally a country to generate the hreflang tag.
Creating multi-language modules
If you are a module developer, you might want to bundle multi-language translations with your module. This page covers all the details step-by-step.
Multi-language
Code i18n
Multi-language fields
Multi-language URLs
Language Packs
Multi-Language Support Forum
Hreflang tag generator
Creating multi-language modules
Docs
API reference
Getting started
Front-end
Tutorials
Selectors
Modules & hooks
Fields, types, input
Access control
Security
Multi-language
More topics