Manage Users & Auth
Registrations
You can enable registrations of on your instance. To prevent SPAM, we recommend to enable to following signup settings:

Require email verification
Require approval
Registration approval PeerTube >= 5.1
If signup require approval, users will request registration on your instance and will have to fill a Registration reason to help you to decide if you want to accept or not the user.

Registration reason input

Administrators and moderators can then list registration requests on the instance.

Registration list table

And accept or reject them. A Moderation response must be filled that will be sent to the user to explain its registration request has been accepted/rejected.

Accepting a registration will automatically create the user.

Registration accept modal

Manage users
The user menu allows you to manage all existing users on your instance.

Window displayed when in user menu

Users will be created when they register to your instance, but you may also create users manually using the "create user" button at the top right of the user menu.

Under the user menu you can update or delete a user by clicking on the three dots  at the left of a user info.

User dot button

Edit user will allow you to update user informations - see below.
Delete user will allow you to definitely delete this user. All of that user's videos will also be deleted.
Ban will disable connection for this user but videos and comments will be kept as is. No one else will be able to register with the same nickname or email address.
Editing users
When clicking on Edit, you can update parameters for a user such as email, role, video quota and so on. You also can specify if it needs review before a video goes public.

Window displayed when clicking on Edit user

You have two ways to reset password:

by sending a reset link to the user email
by changing it manually
Roles
Role defines what a user is allowed to do on the instance. There are three roles on PeerTube: Administrator, Moderator, and User.

Administrator
Administrators can do anything, and have access to the full admin backend.

Add, Remove, and Edit user accounts, including Admin and Moderator accounts
View, Edit, Add and Remove instance following and followers
Delete Local Videos
Allow or disallow video storage redundancy for followed instances
Configure the instance:
instance name
short and full descriptions
Terms of Service (ToS)
Whether or not the instance is dedicated to NSFW content
default landing page
default NSFW video display policy (which can be modified by logged-in users)
whether signups are enabled or disabled
default user quotas
whether importing videos is allowed
from YouTube
from a torrent file or Magnet Link
whether or not new videos are automatically blacklisted when uploaded
whether other instances can follow your instance, and whether those followers need to be manually approved or not
administrator email
enable or disable the contact form
Twitter account information for the instance link previews (optional)
transcoding settings
enable or disable transcoding
enable or disable mkv, .mov, .avi, and .flv videos (this is all or none)
allow or disallow audio file uploads
number of threads to use for transcoding on the server
which resolutions are enabled (240p, 360p, 480p, 720p, 1080p, 2160p)
cache size for previews and captions
custom JavaScript and CSS
Search for and install Plugins and Themes
View System Jobs, Logs, and Debugging information
Admins also have the ability to perform any action that can be performed by a Moderator or a User

Moderator
Moderators have access to the "Moderation" part of the administration backend which Administrators also see.

View user account information:
username
email address
daily/total quotas
role
creation date
Add accounts with the User role.
View video abuse reports
reporter
abuse report date and time
video title (with link to video)
Delete, Comment, Accept or Reject video abuse reports
View blacklisted videos
video title
whether the video is labeled as sensitive or not
whether the video has been unfederated or not (only applies to local videos)
date and time of the blacklist
View muted accounts
account username and instance
date and time of the mute
View muted instances
instance domain
date and time of the mute
Blacklist videos
Mute Accounts
Mute Instances
List, accept and reject registration requests
Moderators can also do anything that a User account can do.

User
User is the default role.

Create, Edit, and Delete channels associated with their account
Create, Edit, and Delete playlists associated with their account
Upload, Edit, and Delete videos to their account, associated with one of their channels
Comment on videos
Add videos to playlists, or remove videos from them
Change user settings (See the Use PeerTube page for more information)
Report videos to the moderators with a comment about why the video is being reported
Quotas
Video Quota
Video Quota represents the size limit a user cannot exceed when uploading videos. Each time a user upload a video, Peertube checks if there is enough quota to store it. If not, the upload is denied. Beware, the quota after an upload is estimated only on the size of the file uploaded. However, after transcoding (which outputs videos of unpredictable size) the video resolutions resulting of the transcoding are also taken into account in a user's quota. If you have enabled multiple resolutions, a user can use more than their quota on disk. Peertube will provide you an estimation of maximal space a user will use according to your transcoding options. You can change the default for new users in the configuration menu.

Daily Video Quota
Daily Video Quota represents the max quota a user is allowed to upload by day. You can tune this parameter to adjust the resources your instance will use. For instance, if you have many users transcoding could take a long time, so limiting upload by user by day could help to share resources between them. You can change the default for new users in the configuration menu.

Once you are satisfied with your user, you can click on the "Update User" button to save modifications.

(A: Collect, use) (DT: Email address, account information) (P: account management, user protection)

(S: We collect email address, account information for account management. We  use email address, account information  for user protection.)